# Code and data repository for paper "The geopolitical economy of a chips shortage: the United States and European Union cases"

Hi!

I hope you are doing fine. In this repository you will find the codes I used for extracting, processing and visualizing data from 4 different sources, for a geopolitical economy analysis of the chips shortage on early 2020s. You will also find a 'final_output.csv' file, containing the data I used for visualizations in the paper associated with these codes. **The data download and aggregation processes are computationally intensive, so I highly recommend you recreate this exercise keeping that in mind**. Here is brief description of the content of each file:

1. **0_dr_comtrade_api** provides a structured access to the United Nations Comission for Trade and Development (UNCTAD) database called COMTRADE, which is fed through the reports of multiple trade statistics (State) agencies across the world. It's known that it has some quality issues that can be improved through further cleaning protocols, which I didn't apply in this case as the objective of this analysis is very exploratory. In the paper you can find some references to recent projects where protocols are presented to improve the quality of the data in this database. Their review is encouraged, in case of interest in International Trade data.
2. **1dr_bigquery_patents.ipynb** is the only Jupyter Notebook in this project, as my best programming language between Python and R is the latter. Nevertheless, Python is used only to access Google's Big Query through API, because once that entrance is reached the data has to be extracted through SQL language and protocols. It is recommended that you also take advantage of the Big Query platform to perform further processing of the data, as it's high dimensionality is well handled by their servers and basically free (at the moment of writing, and for the objective of the paper for which the codes were written).
3. **2dr_ilostat_data.r** accesses ILOSTAT database, hosted by the International Organization of Labour (ILO), to extract indicators about labor force composition of the countries in interest. It's quickly accessed through *Rilostat* package, and the API response provides tidy information that doesn't require further processing, unless others indicators need to be calculated (for example, the proportion of certain labor group relative to the total working-age population).
4. **3dr_finances.r** is the shortest of these codes, as it provides a simple yet less sophisticated access to the data present in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) *data explorer* platform. In the latter, you can search for indicators in a click-based webpage, and then allocate a SDMX-friendly url that allows developers and analysts to access that data through code.
5. **4dp_dataset_construction.r** is the code that puts all previously retrieved data together, building a table inside a *.parquet* file built and managed throughout the previous codes. This final table contains all the indicators used in the paper, as well as some additional used to explore the data and 'it's narrative' about the chips shortage on early 2020s.
6. **5dp_analysis.r** provides the codes used to produce the visualizations present in the paper, as well as some other used to further explore and compare the data. This file so you can template the format with your data and for your own purposes.
7. **final_output.csv** is the table constructed in *4dp_dataset_construction.r*, but in csv format so researchers not so familiar with R or Python can still explore the results to which I arrived. Or even use them for their own research purposes.

In case you have any doubt, commentary or improvement suggestion, please contact me. For further inquiries about the reasons for the selection of this specific data, please refer to the paper.
